.. _lattice:

Lattice notes
#############

Programming model overview
==========================

Lattice families do not all use the same non-volatile programming path.
The file extension and the target memory selected on the command line matter.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Family
     - Volatile load
     - Non-volatile programming
   * - MachXO2
     - ``.bit`` to SRAM
     - ``.jed`` to internal Flash/NVCM
   * - MachXO3L/MachXO3LF
     - ``.bit`` to SRAM
     - ``.jed`` to internal NVCM/Flash
   * - MachXO3D
     - ``.bit`` to SRAM
     - ``.jed`` plus ``--flash-sector``
   * - iCE40
     - ``.bin`` through SPI
     - direct SPI flash access
   * - ECP5/Certus-NX/CrossLink-NX
     - ``.bit`` to SRAM
     - ``.bit``, ``.bin`` or ``.mcs`` to external SPI flash
   * - ECP3
     - ``.bit`` to SRAM
     - external SPI flash write is not supported

For MachXO2/MachXO3 devices, internal Flash/NVCM is programmed through
the Lattice JTAG/ISC command flow. Do not provide a ``--bridge`` file for
this path. The ``spiOverJtag`` bridge bitstreams shipped with
openFPGALoader are used by other vendor families, or by Lattice families
with an external SPI flash path, not by MachXO3 internal Flash/NVCM
programming.

For ECP5 and Nexus devices, openFPGALoader can use the FPGA's internal
JTAG-to-SPI access path to reach an external SPI flash. For iCE40, the
board entry usually describes a direct FTDI-to-SPI flash connection.

MachXO2/MachXO3
===============

Flash memory
------------

``.jed`` file is the default format generated by *Lattice Diamond*, so
nothing special must be done to generate this file for internal
Flash/NVCM programming.

File load:

.. code-block:: bash

    openFPGALoader [-b yourboard] [--flash-sector CFG0] impl1/*.jed

or with an explicit cable:

.. code-block:: bash

    openFPGALoader -c yourCable -f impl1/*.jed

where ``yourboard`` may be:

* ``machX02EVN``
* ``machX03EVN``
* ``machXO3SK``

and where ``--flash-sector CFG0`` is needed for the MachXO3D Breakout Board.

``.bit`` may also be used for *machXO2* internal Flash programming. For
MachXO3L/MachXO3LF internal Flash, prefer the Diamond-generated ``.jed``
file. A MachXO3 ``.bit`` is most commonly used for SRAM load or for an
external configuration flash flow, depending on the board and Diamond
export settings.

MachXO3 JEDEC files may contain multiple link-field sections:

* main configuration data
* ``NOTE EBR_INIT DATA`` for embedded block RAM initialization
* ``NOTE END CONFIG DATA`` marking the end of configuration data
* ``NOTE TAG DATA`` for NVCM1/UFM pages, when present
* ``NOTE FEATURE_ROW`` for Feature Row and FEABITS

When a design does not use UFM, Diamond may still emit a trailing all-zero
``TAG DATA`` block. This should not be treated as user payload.

SRAM
----

To generate a ``.bit`` file, *Bitstream file* must be checked under
*Exports Files* in the *Lattice Diamond* left panel.

File load:

.. code-block:: bash

    openFPGALoader [-b yourboard] impl1/*.bit

or:

.. code-block:: bash

    openFPGALoader -c yourCable impl1/*.bit

where ``yourboard`` may be:

* ``machX02EVN``
* ``machX03EVN``
* ``machXO3SK``

iCE40
=====

``.bin`` is the default format generated by *nextpnr*, so nothing special must be done.

Since most ice40 boards uses the same pinout between *FTDI* and *SPI flash* a generic *ice40_generic* board is provided.

For the specific case of the *iCE40HXXK-EVB* where no onboard programmer is present, please use this:

============= ===============
     FTDI      iCE40HXXK-EVB
============= ===============
SI  (ADBUS1)  Pin 8
SCK (ADBUS0)  Pin 9
SO  (ADBUS2)  Pin 7
CS  (ABDUS4)  Pin 10
RST (ADBUS6   Pin 6
DONE (ADBUS7) Pin 5
============= ===============

Bin file load:

.. code-block:: bash

    openFPGALoader -b ice40_generic /somewhere/*.bin

Since it's a direct access to the flash (SPI) the ``-b`` option is required.

ECP5/ECP3/Certus-NX/CertusPro-NX/Crosslink-NX
=============================================

SRAM
----

.. code-block:: bash

    openFPGALoader [-b yourBoard] [-c yourCable] -m project_name/*.bit

.. HINT::
  By default, openFPGALoader loads bitstream in memory, so the ``-m`` argument is optional.

SPI Flash
---------

.. note::

   SPI Flash write is not supported for ECP3 family.

For ECP5, Certus-NX, CertusPro-NX and CrossLink-NX boards with external SPI
flash, ``-f`` selects flash programming. This is a different path from
MachXO3 internal Flash/NVCM programming.

BIT:

.. code-block:: bash

    openFPGALoader [-b yourBoard] [-c yourCable] -f project_name/*.bit # or *.bin

MCS:

To generate ``.mcs`` file *PROM File* must be checked under *Exports Files* in *Lattice Diamond* left panel.

.. code-block:: bash

    openFPGALoader [-b yourBoard] [-c yourCable] project_name/*.mcs

Dumping external SPI flash:

.. code-block:: bash

    openFPGALoader [-b yourBoard] [-c yourCable] --dump-flash flash_dump.bin
    openFPGALoader [-b yourBoard] [-c yourCable] --dump-flash -o 0x100000 flash_dump_tail.bin

When the SPI flash is known in openFPGALoader's flash database, the dump
size is calculated automatically. The first command dumps the whole SPI
flash; the second dumps from offset ``0x100000`` to the end of flash. Use
``--file-size`` only when a shorter dump is wanted, or when the flash chip
is unknown and automatic capacity detection is unavailable.

Dumping MachXO2/MachXO3 internal Flash/NVCM:

.. code-block:: bash

    openFPGALoader [-b yourBoard] [-c yourCable] --dump-flash machxo_internal.bin
    openFPGALoader [-b yourBoard] [-c yourCable] --dump-flash -o 0x1000 --file-size 0x2000 machxo_window.bin

For MachXO2, MachXO3L, and MachXO3LF devices, ``--dump-flash`` reads the
internal non-volatile configuration memory through the Lattice ISC/JTAG path
instead of using an external SPI flash bridge. The dump is page based
(``16`` bytes per page) and contains the CFG area followed by the UFM area.
When ``--file-size`` is omitted or set to ``0``, openFPGALoader dumps from
the selected offset to the end of the known internal flash layout. For
example, an ``LCMXO3LF-9400C`` dump contains ``12539`` CFG pages plus
``3582`` UFM pages, for ``257936`` bytes total.

Erasing MachXO2/MachXO3 internal Flash/NVCM:

.. code-block:: bash

    openFPGALoader [-b yourBoard] [-c yourCable] --bulk-erase
    openFPGALoader [-b yourBoard] [-c yourCable] --bulk-erase --flash-sector CFG
    openFPGALoader [-b yourBoard] [-c yourCable] --bulk-erase --flash-sector UFM

For MachXO2, MachXO3L, and MachXO3LF devices, ``--bulk-erase`` uses the
Lattice ISC erase flow for internal Flash/NVCM. Without ``--flash-sector``,
the erase mask is ``ALL``. To reduce accidental damage, select a sector when
only part of the internal memory should be erased. Supported sector names are
``CFG``, ``UFM``, ``FEATURE``, ``SRAM``, and ``ALL``. Be careful with
``FEATURE`` and ``ALL`` because feature bits control configuration behavior
and port enables.
